Hello, everyone.
This is sort of a bigger picture video.
We are not going to be writing any code.
Instead in this video, we are going to answer three questions.
So, number one, why was the app that we built in our previous lessons so important?
Number two, what is the missing ingredient that will let us build more advanced apps?
And finally, number three, what are we going to be doing for the remainder of this course?
Let's start up at the top with number one and ask ourselves why was this application that we just built
so important?
Well, it's because we are now at least a little bit familiar with the process of receiving an incoming
request, making a decision based on the user's input and then sending back a response.
Now, understanding this basic cycle of request and response request and response is insanely powerful
because that's really all any application does.
The real question becomes what do we do in between the request and response?
So I want you to think of a sandwich.
Typically the most interesting part of a sandwich is whatever is in between the bread.
So if we think of the incoming request as one piece of bread and the response that our server sends
back as the other piece of bread, that would mean that the peanut butter and jelly or the meat of our
sandwich is our if statement that checks the user sky color value.
Now, granted, that's a pretty boring and simple sandwich that we made, but that's not the point.
The point is that we now know how to make a sandwich at all.
That's huge.
Now we just need to learn how to put more interesting ingredients into our sandwich.
Which brings us to the second question of this video.
What is the missing ingredient that will let us build more interesting or advanced applications?
Well, if we look at our course overview, we are now at least a little bit familiar with the first
three items.
So as you can probably guess, the missing ingredient is Mongo DB.
Technically, the missing ingredient is any database system.
But in this course, we are going to be using Mongo DB in particular.
Now, before we worry about what a database is, let's first look at the big picture.
So the app or server that we built in our previous lesson can read the user's input.
Right.
We were able to determine if they typed in blue or not, but as soon as the server sends back its response,
that data that the user typed in and submitted is gone.
Our server does not remember it now for certain simple applications, that's OK.
But for most complex applications, we need to have some sort of permanency, right?
Eventually we are going to want to remember or store the user's data.
And this is where databases come into play.
So, for example, what if instead of asking the user what color is the sky, what if instead we were
asking them to register for a new account so they would need to enter a username and password?
Well, we would want to permanently remember those values that they choose so that we can reference
them the next time they try to log in.
That's just one example.
There are millions of examples.
Databases are everywhere.
Any time you post a comment on Instagram, it's getting saved into a database or anytime on Twitter,
you send out a new tweet that's being saved into a database.
Really anything you do on the Internet that is permanent likely involves a database.
Now, instead of us learning about databases in a cold, soulless, academic, isolated vacuum, we
are going to learn about them within the holistic context of creating applications to be more specific,
full stack JavaScript applications.
Which segues nicely into the third.
And final question of this video.
What are we going to do for the remainder of this course?
Well, aside from a few bonus or extra credit topics, at the very end of the course, we are going
to spend the rest of our time together building to applications.
Let's call them app number one and number two.
App number one is small, unorganized and messy and oversimplified.
On the other hand, app number two is big, organized and very real world.
Now, you might be wondering why we're going to build two apps instead of just one, right?
You might think, why not just skip the small unorganized project and just focus all of our effort on
the big organized project right away?
Well, trust me, there is a method to my.
Madness, so right now, our focus is on learning the very basics of a database.
However, if we jumped straight into ACT number two, we would need to worry about things like templating
engines, user registration, user authentication, security error handling, how to keep our code and
files organized and much, much more.
Trust me, we don't want to deal with all of that in this moment.
So for the time being, we need a project that is complex enough to need permanency and a database,
but simple enough that we don't overwhelm ourselves with all of these topics on the screen right now.
That's actually my biggest pet peeve with other courses and instructors.
They structure their example projects in a way to where you're being introduced to ten new topics at
once and you just drown in a sea of new topics, all fighting for your brain's horsepower at the same
time.
So the idea in this course is that app no one will get us comfortable with the big picture, the basic
mechanics of building a full stack app.
And then once we've absorbed some of that and some of it becomes second nature, we can move on to app
number two, where we do worry about real world complications and best practices and so on and so forth.
Now, really quick right now, I want to show you a sneak peak of both app number one and number two,
just so you know what to expect.
So here is app number one, and this is the finished final product that we are going to be building
together.
It's a very simple to do app.
And you can see there's a text field here.
And if I type in, feed the dog and then either push, enter or click the blue submit button, it adds
it down here.
And let me add a few more items, maybe pay attention to the cat and maybe buy fruits and vegetables.
OK, so now I've got this list of items and each item has two different actions.
You can edit it or delete it.
So if I click edit on Feed the Dog, this little pop up appears and I can type something new in.
I can say feed the dog, maybe add the word today at the end of it.
OK, you can see it gets updated and then obviously I'm free to delete any of the items I want.
So if I want to delete by fruits and vegetables, just click delete.
We see this little pop up.
Do you really want to delete by fruits and vegetables permanently?
Yes, I do.
So click OK, and it's gone.
Now, the whole point of this application is that our list of items is being permanently stored in a
database.
So even if I closed my Web browser and then came back and revisited this app maybe a year or two from
now, this data, these items would still be here waiting for me.
Or better yet, I could step away from my computer and maybe use my phone or tablet.
And my data would still be available to me because instead of just localhost, we are also going to
learn how to push this app up onto the Internet so you can share it with your friends and family.
So in the address bar, if I instead visit this U.
URL because our data and database lives in the cloud, you can access it from any device.
So this is pretty fun.
You will get a U.
RL that you can share with your friends and family.
This is just my example.
Temporary U.
RL, you will receive a new unique URL for yourself and then you can see them add new items to the list.
Big picture.
There's not a whole lot going on with this app, but it is great practice of learning how to stitch
together.
Are three environments the web browser?
No, just for the server and Mongo DB for the permanency or database layer.
OK, so that's a review of app No.
One that we are going to build together.
Now let's take a look at the more complex app number two.
So this is what the homepage looks like.
If you are not logged in, it shows you a registration form to sign up for a new account.
If you try to sign up for a username that already exists that someone has already used, you get a real
time feedback message.
That username is already taken.
So if I add unique at the end of it, good to go.
If you add something that is not a valid email address, you get a warning in real time.
You get the idea.
Now, instead of creating an account in this moment, let's just log in to an existing account, show
you around up in the header.
You can log in as soon as I sign in.
You can see the homepage looks very different.
By the way, this is a journal or diary type of application.
So you can see the homepage now that I'm logged in, reads the latest from those you follow.
This is essentially a very basic social network type of application.
These are articles or journal entries written by the people that I follow so I can see this one is titled
Destroying Furniture is Fun, written by Kitty Doe.
So if I click on that.
Here is their article, and I can even click on their name to go to their profile.
Up in the top right menu bar, I can click on my own circle to go to my own profile.
So I have three posts, I have one follower, I'm following two accounts we can click on that.
You can see I'm following barks a lot.
And Kitty Doe also back up in the header.
I can click on this icon to search for the content that I'm interested in.
So if I search for the word furniture.
In real time, we get search results, so we see destroying furniture is fun, that existing article
by Kitty Doe by search for something that's going to return multiple results like the word post.
There we go.
Because I use that word in my title.
You get the idea.
Let's close this live search results feature.
I can click on this green create post button to obviously create a new post or article.
Obviously, a user is able to edit or delete their own existing articles.
OK, changing gears.
If we look up in the header, we can see a chat or conversation looking icon.
If you click that, it opens chat box, connects you to the chat room.
And this is not a one on one direct messaging inbox system.
This is more of an old school traditional public chat room.
So I can type in a message and say hello.
And any and all users that are logged in will be placed into this same chat room with me.
In the real world, the public chat room like this would probably just be taken advantage of by weirdos
and creeps and malicious users.
But in the context of this course, I think it's a fun programming exercise.
So I'm logged in as the Brad user in this browser, but I actually have a secondary browser in this
window.
I'm logged in as the Kitty Doe account.
So if I connect to the chat room here, I can say Meow.
And back in this window, you can see that that message appears again, this is just a fun programming
exercise to see what a server can really do.
Being able to have real time to direction communication of data like this is a lot of fun to set up.
OK, and then finally, if I jump back to the home page of the application, remember, this is my personalized
feed because I'm logged in.
However, if I use this button in the top right to sign out.
You can see the homepage now correctly treats me as if I'm a guest, all right.
And that concludes the sneak preview of the finished product of app number two that we are going to
build together in this course now to bring this full circle.
What do app number two and app number one have in common?
Well, they both use a database to store data permanently.
In the case of this simple app, number one, that's just the to do list items in the case of the more
complex app.
Number two, the database is storing the usernames, the passwords, the article posts, the relationships
of which users are following, which other users, so on and so forth.
So where do we go from here?
Well, in our very next lesson, we are going to begin learning about databases, in particular a system
named Mongo DB.
And as soon as we learn even just a little tiny bit about Mongo DB, we can begin to create this to
do list app together.
I'm super excited because this marks the point in the course where we can finally begin to build real
meaningful fun applications.
We've eaten enough of our metaphorical broccoli.
We worked through the 10 days of JavaScript to understand the programming language itself.
We learned a bit about the Web browser as a JavaScript environment.
We just learned a little bit about Know James and how it can be used to create a server and what the
whole point of a server even is.
And now finally, we just need to fold in a little bit of understanding of what a database is and we
will be off to the races.
So let's keep our momentum rolling.
Let's get excited for databases.
And I will see you in the next lesson.